Is a five minute Indi individual, um, oral submission
by Ryan Daniel.
Ryan, thank you for joining us. We're in your hands.
Uh, thank you and good afternoon.
Can I just do a sound check and video check?
Um, yeah. Can you see and hear me okay?
Yeah. Done. Excellent.
Um, so I won't repeat my submission.
I'll just introduce myself. So, good morning.
Uh, I am a New Zealand citizen, but also a US citizen,
and I'm, uh, pretty concerned about this new, uh,
fifth tax proposal
and its impact on retirees like myself who would love
to return to New Zealand for a longer period
of time than six months.
Uh, my background, I've worked globally for 35 plus years,
uh, for firms like British Petroleum, uh, Schlumberger,
oilfield services, et cetera.
I retired from Alaska, um, from BP in 2020.
Um, and over the last few years, of course, I was locked out
for three years, couldn't get back at all.
And my wife and I have been looking at moving back
to New Zealand for around, you know, six to eight months,
maybe even nine months of the year.
My family is still, uh, in, uh,
in the us My kids went through the school system there.
Um, so we have strong ties there.
We have a house there, et Yeah,
that's right. Sorry, go ahead.
No, no, no. That's all right. We've just got a queue
for a question here, but keep, keep going.
Oh, okay. I was just gonna finish my intro
and then I've, I've got a, uh, page of just, just a bit
of a summary of um, what you probably have in front of you.
Um, so I'd like to present changes potential, uh, proposal
to improve the outcomes, uh, in your new fifth tax,
both in terms of income
and capital gains for both parties, principally,
principally being retirees like myself
who would love to return to New Zealand.
There's probably five
or 10,000 more like me that have US citizenship, um,
and have primary taxation jurisdiction in the us So
the New Zealand extended ram, which in my understanding is,
is really applies to people under a dual tax jurisdiction.
And the fifth income tax requirements
for this specific cadre of dual NZ USA dual nationals, uh,
both to encourage residency
and negate the very detrimental issues which include the out
of sync tax filing years, the costly
and complex meshing of dualing IRS primary
and IRD secondary taxation jurisdiction
as currently proposed.
So my proposal in a nutshell, first I would propose
that the extended RAM tax residency requirement is either
shelved completely or deferred to at least nine
to 12 months per physical calendar year.
Pretty much a full-time, uh, permanent residence
of New Zealand as is the uh,
non extended ram if you only have single tax jurisdiction.
The example is my family,
and I'm guessing most USA New Zealand dual nationals will
likely spend, uh, three plus months abroad every year.
We often maintain houses in other countries.
I've got a house in the us, um, I sort
of call it my primary residence, um,
and have USA based health insurance, medical, uh,
we have family, et cetera, et cetera.
So why am I proposing that?
Because most US New Zealand dual nationals in retirement use
only investment savings from for example IRAs.
If you're not familiar with these,
we can have a quick talk afterwards.
Uh, Roth RIA, UH, IRAs
and investment savings for living expenses
'cause we don't have pensions, each
of which may have a significant,
a significant capital gains, uh, gain
or loss during a particular year.
And income dividend components that cannot be easily managed
nor would it be financially prudent
and is the subject of full US A IRS penalties, et cetera.
New Zealand also does not currently have a capital gains
taxation in this country.
You could argue a few of the bright line Ts are,
but let's just say not for now
and applying it to foreign capital gains such
as income earned outside New Zealand while non-resident is
simply not fair in this day and age.
The other strength to the bow here is the fifth income tax.
I would also propose the extended RAM taxpayers cadre.
Potentially it's me plus another five
or 10,000 people with primary USA tax jurisdiction not be
subject to additional New Zealand IRD income tax on
foreign sourced income.
Currently Australians don't do that
for New Zealand temporary residents.
If we choose to work in New Zealand in retirement, then
of course N-Z-I-R-D-P-A-Y-E would be applicable.
Likewise, any withholding tax on
New Zealand based investments.
So why would I say this?
Because most US dual nationals primarily use
USA based savings.
IRA and Roth IRA accounts for income planning and retirement
because again, we don't have any pensions taxing any
of this already budgeted USA taxed income in New Zealand
at NZ IRD marginal rates even with dual taxation, uh,
agreement credit will make it impossibly expensive,
especially if NZ USA dual nationals like myself would like
to only spend six to nine months a year in New Zealand
and then three to six months in the USA periodically.
To be clear, there is no real income other than selling down
investment, uh, portfolios in retirement for myself
and others, which of course triggers a second wave
of additional tax, both IRS
and IIRD to pay any bills
that were derived from New Zealand.
A better outcome for everyone for dual nationals.
Uh, we do spend real money in New Zealand
and it's actually proportional to the amount
of time we spend in the country in residents New Zealand
as a country does not lose out on foreign source funds.
It just does not have to obtain them
through the highly complex regressive secondary tax
structure for US.
NZ dual national spending more time in New Zealand.
At present, we intend
to spend less than six months in New Zealand
because of the multiple financial impact issues I've raised
and greater than six months in US
or traveling, uh, internationally every year.
In this scenario, NZ will miss out on any potential fifth
capital gains tax or fifth income tax.
And importantly, uh, our shelved desire to invest more time,
effort, money and energy in the New Zealand, uh, economy is,
is shoved in a nutshell.
USA fuel nationals with current with the current
and proposed rules are too financially punitive
and regressive when on residents time greater than six
months, they're too rigid in structure.
It doesn't take into account modern dual national retirees
lifestyles who travel and live between two countries
and have a very fine balance
for their retirement incomes and funding.
My example, we will have to continue spending a lot of time,
uh, outside of New Zealand, uh, in retirement
because I can't afford to be here more than six months.
Okay, Ryan, we'll just have to get you to wind up
'cause we're at time and I've got a question from
Dr. Russell here.
Okay. I've actually just got one more sentence. Yeah.
I only hope this feedback helps to clarify the position
of my family and likely, you know, 10,000
or so others, uh, in a similar position
that spend the majority of their careers in the USA
and overseas and now wish to spend six to nine months
spending our savings in New Zealand in their golden
years. Thank you very much.
Okay. Thank questions. Yeah. Thank you for that.
Uh, we've got a question from Dr. Deborah Russell.
So thank you Ryan. Uh, two questions actually.
One is that the RAM rules are supposed
to be an improvement on the fifth current fifth rules
for people such as yourself.
Are you saying it doesn't improve things?
Uh, yes. I'm saying the, uh,
the financial burden is still way too high if you
have dual tax
Jurisdiction. Okay, alright, that's
fine. So we're very short on time,
but the other, um, problem here is
of course the US taxes on, uh, citizenship, not, um,
whereas New Zealand taxes on residency,
but you wanna spend nine months a year in New Zealand isn't
one of the solutions to, um, spend
or nine months a year in New Zealand.
But give up us res give up US citizenship.
My wife is American, I've got family there.
We've spent 35 years in the us.
I've got two daughters in California.
So the answer to that question's, no.
Then I think, you know, you like New Zealand has the
obligation to fix your life choices. Mm-hmm.
Okay. Well, Asking for the obligation, I'm just asking
for fairness and application Yeah. Of
The tax rules.
Yeah, no, that's fair enough. And thank you Mr.
Thank Daniel for giving us your time, uh,
and your insights today.
Thank you. Right.
Uh, we've got, now we've got avid legal here. Yep. Welcome.
Sorry, we're up against a hard finish today.
So if you can, um, leave us a bit of time.
You've got a 10 minute presentation
and, um, leave us a bit of time for questions if,
if, if you're able. Thank you.
Yeah, I'm just gonna introduce ourselves.
So I'm Madison Kilworth
and this is Murray White from Avid legal
director and co-founder.
We represent Avid
and also the other people that you would've seen on our
submissions who support, uh, the patients.
Thanks Maddie. Um,
essentially we really applaud the efforts
to improve the ESOP scheme for, uh, tax rules
for the New Zealand ESOP participants.
Um, we made four recommendations.
I'm just gonna quickly go through them
and then we can dig into the background of why
and any questions.
Um, the first recommendation really drives off, uh,
the feeling amongst the high growth sector in New Zealand
that the bill misses the point.
Um, the, the deferral
of tax has already been solved by the market.
There's a very high use of options to, um,
instead of the grant of shares, the use of the options
defers the payment until the time where an ESOP employee,
uh, participant exercises the option to,
to purchase the shares.
So that already happens now,
and an option scheme is very flexible
and it gives the employee the top, the, the choice of when
to exercise and suffer the tax
or when it wants to defer the tax too.
Um, we think really to, to move the needle, um, for,
for ESOP and participants.
Uh, the idea is to not just, uh, is to, to further payment,
but not the valuation date.
That would make a, a large difference to a, a large number
of companies working in the space.
The valuation should be the date in which the share, the,
the employee obtains the shares that would effectively, uh,
get rid of what I call a quasi capital gains tax.
Uh, so after the date
that the employees purchased the shares,
they pay the lock in the tax at that time, the value at
that time and then future value would increase.
Yeah. Question now? No.
You want, well, no, I was just thinking
That I'm just carry,
Um, so that, that, that is the background to our,
our first recommendation, which is to defer the, the timing
and payment, but not the valuation date.
Um, second
and third recommendations relate to
what constitutes a liquidity event.
So, liquidity event is important
because if there's a liquidity event that accelerates
or triggers the payment of the deferred tax amount, um,
there are two aspects of that that we recommend changing.
First one is that, uh, the payment
of dividends is a liquidity event into the current proposal.
Um, the second one is, well, in that regard, um,
receiving dividends won't normally amount to the size
of the, the tax payment.
Uh, and so a small dividend payment could trigger the,
the payment of a, a large ESOP payment.
Um, we don't think that's a true liquidity event.
Doesn't give an employee the funds to be able
to pay the, the tax.
Uh, the second one is that it's quite reasonably common
for startups, particularly as they grow to, to restructure.
Um, and a typical restructure is
what we call a top hat restructure.
Uh, and it's effectively
where an employee may be swapping their shares
for shares in, in a holding company above the company
that they're initially employed employer.
Uh, they do that for a number of reasons
and set that some of that out in their submissions.
Again, that's not a liquidity event.
It doesn't create funds,
it doesn't give the employees funds in their hands
to be able to pay the tax.
So we think that should be a carved out from,
uh, a liquidity event.
Uh, and a fourth recommendation is that, uh,
this is an opt-in regime
and as drafted, it's opt-in by the employer.
The employer determines whether the, the,
the shares on offer, um, will be considered deferral shares.
And we think that should be an employee choice rather than
the employer choice.
Each employee has their own risk profile,
their own individual circumstances then think it would be
too hard to put that in the hands of the employee
to choose rather than the employer across the,
their employee group as a whole.
Okay.
Debra, did you have a question? Yeah, I'm,
I'm a little puzzled because of course receiving
shares in the company is, it's a form of remuneration.
Mm-hmm. Um, and it's a little tricky
because you are saying you want to get taxed
at the effective tax date,
even though the payment is deferred is the date at which
you received the shares.
Um, but you know, the, the, the, the form
of remuneration there is a, for the employee is
that the value of the shares grows as the company grows.
So that's the remuneration is the increase in
the value of the shares.
But you, you are saying that in fact,
you shouldn't be taxed on that increase in your remuneration
should be taxed only on the starting value of the shares.
Correct. And the reason I,
Sorry. No. Okay. I've got that
now. Thank you.
Um, I, uh, but you know, here's the problem too,
and I, I take your point about the dividend,
but normally, uh, people get taxed on
dividends interest, sorry.
And wages when money is paid.
Um, so, um, I, I guess
what worries me here is, you know,
that then the employee later on would sell the shares.
That's when they get the money and
that would normally be the sort of thing
that triggers the tax liability.
But you are saying that the tax liability should only
be the lower value.
I'm saying it should be the value
of when they receive their shares
and then they take on the risk.
They lock in the tax amount. Yeah. Okay. And, and
Yeah. Alright, so I've
got that.
So, but the other thing is why the worry about the,
the 39% rate?
I would've thought that most people in a startup are earning
a pretty good income anyway.
Um, lots of variation and,
and quite a lot of people in startups will take a lower than
market salary to, uh, to,
to work in a place that's exciting moving world
forward and having a
Chance. So make a commercial decision and
they expect or a,
or a life based decision
and expect the tax system to adjust
to their own individual life choices.
No. And the discuss of the previous,
You need to understand the context of a company
that would, would issue shares to an employee.
Some, some option schemes will be worked out
and say, well, the value that you can buy into the company
is that, say $10 a share.
That's the market value that we have now.
And, and if it's under an option scheme,
it might be two years
before the employee can actually exercise that.
So, which is a retention factor at the point
where they exercised it, the shares might have increased.
And so the way
that an option scheme works under the current regime is
that you would choose to exercise at that point
and suffer the tax at that point.
When you get the, your share those shares on
The difference Between the difference between
what you pay and what Sure.
Yeah. And some employers will say, well, we want
to give you a discount on that
and let's say market goes five $10 per share,
but we'll give them to you for 1 cent.
Give them, gift them to you, in which case the,
the tax is on the spread.
So you're paying tax on the spread. Yep. 1 cent and $10.
Yep. Um, so to the extent that, uh, I'm an employee
and I receive a package of ESOP at the time
and I choose to exercise
and I lock in that tax, that's the tax you pay.
Yeah. And I've got the value at that point,
I'm just down deferring the payment of that tax.
Mm-hmm. So there's still tax being applied on the value
that you receive Yep.
When you get the shares, it's just a deferral
of payment liquid.
Okay. Alright.
Yep. You right with that Deborah.
We're just getting close. Just a very quick start on that.
Tom Stevenson, you wanna defer the payment, uh,
until the shares are sold
or you've got a timeframe in mind? Yeah,
Well, liquidity event is in.
So, uh, if they're sold
or if there's an IPO where they're not unlisted,
but now there's a market you can sell
some of your shares to be able paid
For. Okay. But would also
just some other defined period
be okay or better?
Uh, it was pretty arbitrary.
So if I was working for a nuclear fusion startup company in
Wellington, that's probably a 20 year gain plan.
If I'm working for a SaaS company that's, uh,
growing really fast and,
and potentially a sale very quickly rather than
IPO it could be two years.
No, I get that. But it's a bit and put, put 10 years.
The uncertainty is also for the, for the,
on the other side, for the IRD.
Right. So I'm just trying to see whether,
whether any deferral period be better than I guess the,
The company will eventually be sold or become, uh, yeah.
Liquid in some state or be liquidated and fail.
In which case, out of all those three things, they're part
of your existing definition of what a liquidity event is.
Okay. Okay. Right. We'll have to leave it at that.
But thank you so much for coming. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Okay.
Now we've got, uh, Deloitte, GST Ellen. Thank you.
Uh, you've got 10 minutes. Thanks for your
Patience. Yeah. And I'll try
and give you back a couple of minutes,
take a couple things out.
I've had some chat with officials.
Um, so three things that I'll be covering today.
Two GST technical
and then spending quite a bit of time if we've, we've got it
to go through GST and tax debt.
'cause I think that's pretty
important with what we've actually got.
Uh, B2B elections talked about it this time last year when
there was one change, there's now been a further change.
We just really strongly say
that this regime should not be an lectin,
it should be an opt-out regime.
Everybody should be in the regime 20 years ago is
what we should have done, but we just didn't.
It's a tax on the ill informed or unadvised.
It causes lots of compliance costs.
We should just have everybody in the regime
and they can opt out if they want to.
Uh, the next one is GST
and Joint ventures broadly supported.
We think these are very complex rules.
We don't know if they're fully going to work yet
because we are still working through all the circumstances.
We've had discussions with officials
and we think there needs to be more flexibility
and we look forward to working with officials to go through
with that in more detail.
Um, so then turning to tax debt.
Um, I sat here last year
and mentioned that I was concerned that total amount
of outstanding tax debt was $8 billion.
And I confessed when I sat here this time last year,
I wasn't really that aware of the changes that came
through in 2017 and then gone through and looked at them.
In the time that we've sat there, the tax debt has gone up
to 9.3 billion.
Right? It's gone up over a billion dollars for each
of the last two years.
If there was a tax loophole in the legislation
that was a hundred million dollars,
there would be immense action
that would be actually happening to close
that loophole quickly.
This is 10 times bigger than that. Yeah.
There's no point, um, in my mind
getting a number on A GST return
or PAYE return if it doesn't ultimately turn into cash.
And 60% of that tax debt is GST
and PAYE, most of which
is being held in small medium enterprises.
The GST debt has gone up by 15% since last year.
PAYE has gone up by 30%.
The real problem,
not just from a New Zealand perspective about the loss
of revenue to fiscal perspective,
but also quoting from inland revenue from their 25 annual
report as well as causing the government to lose revenue.
Wrongdoing unchecked has a corrosive effect on the morale
and willingness of customers
who do the right thing voluntary.
And I think that social capital is really critical,
particularly there is a massive feeling out there
amongst the business community
that inland revenue has unwillingly become the first bank
of last resort,
and they are in effect creating tax zombie companies.
And what do we mean by a tax zombie company?
We mean a company that if you are six months
behind on your GST and PAYE, you are dead,
but you just don't know it.
And the problem, I could refer to a parrot, I was advised
outside that I should refer to a parrot in the sketch.
Um, but you are dead and it's sad.
No one wants a business to fail,
but even more, we don't want a business to fail
and then linger on and infect other good businesses.
And what's really annoying
for businesses out there is they see in land revenue
as unwillingly being an enabler.
Because if you are a plumber working for a contractor,
you might advance trade credit,
but you'll go to a credit reporting agency
and check on the tax debt.
Inland revenue have had the power since 2017
with some pretty well drafted legislation in my view,
but had their own internal restrictions
that were overly onerous.
They have removed those onerous restrictions
in the last month or so.
So it'll be interesting to see what happens.
But last year the debt went up by over a billion dollars
and no one was reported to a credit reporting agency.
Now what are we gonna do about it?
Because we can't really have Alan sitting down here next
year saying, Hey, now we've got 10 and a half
or $11 billion.
What's actually going to happen?
It sounds counterintuitive,
but what I'm actually suggesting is I think inland revenue
needs to potentially lose its right
as a preferential creditor in certain circumstances.
And I can see people go, oh, hang on. Why?
What I think is if you get to a period of, say
after six months and inland revenue is seen,
however we draft the legislation as basically enabling
a company to turn into a tax zombie,
then if Finland revenue have to report on the fact
that they've lost that preferential status,
you will drive behavioral change within the department.
There are a lot of good people in the department that've got
lots of restrictions and time.
But if you drive that behavior,
you will also drive behavior out there in the
commercial environment.
And that should hopefully stop people using inland revenue
as the first bank of last resort.
So my thought is if it's above whatever it is, x thousand
and x hundred thousand
or six months, you would lose the preferential status for
that six months onwards.
Now inland revenue will lose a little bit of money on
that particular creditor,
but I think on a population-wide basis, it's got
to be better than what we're currently looking at
and we just can't go on.
I'll just pause there. Okay,
Deborah. Um,
thank you. That's really interesting.
We've got the, an annual review
with Inland revenue in a few weeks
so we can take this issue up with them.
It's a bit triggering for me. Back in about 2005.
I did some work on the preferential treatment, uh, for ir,
um, when I was an official at ir, so back to the olden days.
But, um, do you think there's a couple of things.
One of this was driven by, um, ir um, deliberately, um,
working with businesses
or not being hard on businesses during COVID.
Um, do you think some of it's driven by that or? Um,
I think it's gotta be broader than that.
Um, in the submission and we've got the extract
and you can see going back to, um, 2010, yeah, it kind
of was pretty flat.
Yeah. But it really only started shooting up in 2022,
so that's kind of post COVID.
So there was a relaxing and everyone was being nice.
That's fine. But the hard stuff has been after that
and it's getting worse and it's getting worse faster.
Okay. So the other thing I was thinking of is when, um,
I asked fancy new system all went into place, one
of the things we know that happened then was the number
of tax investigators and the like, and,
and some of the regional offices, um, were
let's say redeployed.
Yep. And we were told that the, um, the whole system would,
um, use clever algorithms
and the like to track down fraud and or delays.
And, uh, I take it, I I absolutely get the point about using
IR as the, um, bank of last resort.
Yeah. Do you think that that system has lived
up to its promise or,
Um, I personally think,
and this is just a personal view rather than a firm view.
Yeah. I think the computer system is amazing
and the last system was being held together with,
you know, bubble gum,
Paint the clips and soap.
Yeah. Yeah. And if, if they were lucky. Yeah.
Um, and they couldn't have done what they just sort
of required since that, I personally would've thought
that you should have waited longer
to get the HR benefits from it.
Right. By having more resource.
From our perspective, we would certainly say,
where do we see that inland revenue
will get banged for their buck?
And that would be having more specialists
in the various area, my area, GST
or various things, but also debt.
Yep. I think having specialists
that look at debt would be a critical point.
Okay. I think we might take it up
for Peter Muey when he is
Yeah. And, and, and look,
we are happy to be involved
and happy to provide any comments to, to come through.
It's, it's a huge issue for New Zealand. Yeah, sure. Uh,
We've got Nancy Lou, I just have a very quick one.
Um, thank you, Alan. You said earlier
around the JV rules and your recommendation.
You said that you're with the IR at the moment
to get some answers, questions answered.
How does that, you know, what is that work plan looking like
and is that coming into as further submission into
Oh, I wouldn't be, it would be normally just, um,
conversations with officials would be the
normal way that we work through that. Okay.
Okay. Dr. David Wilson.
Um, so you said that, uh, lose the preferential status.
What did you, what do you think is the mechanism
and what would happen post that?
What I would say is that they preserve preferential status
for that first six month period
because to echo that thing,
we don't want inland revenue coming in with, you know, bang,
you are two days late on your GST, you are out of business.
We don't want that to happen.
But if a business is literally just thumbing its nose at the
revenue, not engaging, not on a payment plan, not responding
to correspondence for six months,
it's probably already debt.
And if inland revenue lets that go on to 12 months
to go, since we've gone parrots, we should go Spider-Man,
with great power comes great responsibility.
If you've got that preferential creditor status
and you don't do anything with it, the anger
from the other business when they see inland revenue get its
first bite is preferential creditor.
Now, if they didn't have it,
maybe it means they get 4 cents in the dollar
rather than 3 cents in the dollar.
It's not gonna change it, but it's gonna
change the emotions.
And I also think it would be a profound driver of behavior
with an in inland revenue
and they may choose where to invest. Yeah, that's
The, we'll have to leave in that. Thank
You, Alan. Thanks for coming in.
Okay.
Chartered Accountants Australia, New Zealand. Thank you.
Uh, Tina Koto, uh, Mr. Chairman, um, I'm Craig ef.
I'm the chairman of the Tax Advisory Group
of Charter Accounts Australia, New Zealand.
Uh, and John Kaon is the New Zealand Tax
and Financial Services leader.
Um, chartered accountants represents about 30,000, uh,
accountants in New Zealand.
So it's a very large organization.
But, um, our, our advice, our, um,
our report, which is 119 pages on this bill, um, is not
anything but an independent report.
Um, and so in other words,
we are really interested in the interests of, uh,
New Zealand Inc.
Uh, not in the interests necessarily of, um,
of individual, uh, accountants.
Um, having said that as an introduction, cans, um,
basically supports most of the changes, uh, in this bill.
We are, we are, we are broadly positive, um,
and we certainly acknowledge the commitment, uh,
by the government
and the policy officials, uh, to resource remedials
and to fix, um, errors and emissions.
That's something, uh, which is, which is really great
because it's a hard act to get right.
Uh, in our oral submission, we're gonna talk about three,
only three areas, uh,
the proposed FIF revenue account method, um, the FBT rules,
uh, and the repeal of the trust disclosure rules
and Section 17, uh, GB
of the Tax Administration Act.
Now on the FIF rules, we say, uh, progress is being made,
uh, but the steps, uh, are too small.
Um, and, uh, the reason, uh, for our comments on that is
that we actually don't think the government is going
to achieve the objectives, uh, that it has set for itself
with, with these reforms.
Um, and so that is, uh, that's a missed opportunity
because you're heading in the right direction.
Uh, the problems are that it's too narrow.
Um, uh, we need, um, it doesn't address, uh,
liquidity valuation challenges adequately.
Um, and, uh,
there's another major issue which is not addressed at all,
which needs to be on the work program, um, which is to, uh,
look at reforms to the financial arrangement rules
because currently an UN on an unrealized basis, uh,
foreigners will be looking at that and,
and deriving a whole lot of income,
which is on an unrealized basis, which is, uh, absolutely,
um, inappropriate.
Uh, uh, so we say can we align, uh, tax
and cash flow, uh, that would, uh,
put us in a strong position, um, to avoid double taxation,
uh, to increase, um, taxation on liquidity, uh,
and to make sure that we have appropriate valuation methods.
Uh, and, and our actual view is that we should, um, uh,
make this optional method of RAM available to all taxpayers.
And I wouldn't see that as being a major loss of revenue.
In fact, I think it might actually add to the revenue base.
It would dramatically simplified the FIF rules,
which are now outdated and too complex.
Right. Uh, I'm, I'm gonna talk about, uh,
fringe benefit tax very briefly.
Um, basically just to urge the government
to stay in the game in terms of wholesale reform
of fringe benefit tax, uh, especially around the area
of motor vehicles and other unclassified benefits.
I mean, they're a very complex area at the moment,
and we could benefit from that work continuing
and coming to fruition.
So we would really support that Continuing.
Uh, in terms of the current bill, um,
we do not support, uh,
moving the gift cards from an unclassified benefit category
and creating into its own category.
It sounds benign,
but once you take it out of unclassified benefits,
you remove it from the di minimis exemption.
And at the moment, a lot of small employers
and even some larger employers will be, um, having
benefits of this type in unclassified benefits.
And as long as it's less than $300 per employee per quarter
or less than 22 and half thousand per employer per annum,
they won't be paying French benefit tax on it.
This is a, this is actually quite a significant shift
without, I don't know how many people are gonna realize
that, but it's important.
Uh, then if we move to, uh, trust disclosure rules,
we absolutely support the removal of those trust disclosure
rules as they stand.
But we strongly recommend
that the commissioner not replicate those rules in full.
We think now with the data that's come through over
what will be five years, by the time these rules end,
there should be sufficient information
around settlers beneficiaries
and the like on that side of things.
And that the rules should be more tailored
to what's actually needed.
The environment shifted. We now have a 39% tax rate
for trustees and for the top marginal rate.
So where's the mischief on some of the stuff?
And it comes back ironically to something I talked
to you about a couple of years ago on the 39% trustee rate
when we were advocating for a 33% rate.
We have actually only 11% of trusts in New Zealand
that earn over that threshold to be at 39%
and they earn 81% of the total trust income.
So there's quite a thing there,
and we want to actually have the rules targeted towards
those larger trusts, not the smaller trusts in terms of
what information you're looking to get.
Uh, finally, we would actually support the retention
of section 17 gb, which is the information collecting, um,
mechanism for tax policy work.
And the reason why we are saying that is
because, uh, we have long advocated for policy
to have good data
and without good data, they can't have good policies,
so we can't have our cake and eat it too.
Um, the balance to that though is that we would ask,
and it's in the mantra of what only revenue do,
but I think it needs to be spelled out
that they only collect what they actually need to use
what they don't already have.
And you might laugh at that, but it's actually true
that they don't already have it, that it's not
otherwise publicly available
and that they're mindful of the cost
to the taxpayer to comply.
Uh, but that's the balance we see as appropriate. Okay.
Very good. I've got, um, Dr.
Deborah sel, lovely to see you both. Um, thank you.
Um, thank you for the comments on 17 gb
that would be position we would take to, um,
the trust disclosure rules.
Um, so what about new trusts who move into that category?
You're saying the existing trusts, we already,
I suppose they're filing tax
returns, aren't they? So we can, so,
So, so I would assume that the new trust would still have
to provide the first off the cab rank information, right?
Yeah, well you could organize it that way Yep.
But not go beyond. We're trying to minimize the information
that you have to keep providing.
Yep, yep. So the annual, so, all right.
'cause I mean, I, I regard that as a really important thing
to do around trust 'cause they're quite a strong
vehicle for people to Yes.
Do interesting things. Um, um, take your point on FBT.
Um, um, so thank you.
Um, the, the, um, financial arrangements rules, could some
of that just be sorted by, um,
just shifting some thresholds up
And Well, you, you are already
doing that in the current bill.
Right. But I mean,
the cash basis person threshold's not gonna be huge.
Yeah. Uh, and this is a issue and,
and if you're looking at migrants coming in,
they've probably got more money than the cash
basis person threshold.
Yeah. Right. And the reality is we are quite an outlier in
the, in the commun international community
by taxing on an unrealized basis.
Mm. Yeah. And, and it's very volatile
around year can be very volatile around year end
and impact provisional tax.
Yeah. It's hard
to see why taxing on a realized basis wouldn't be a good
outcome, given that the unrealized basis was gonna generate
a profit one year and a huge loss the next year.
Yeah. And, And ultimately it's a tax on nothing.
Yeah. Okay. They swings And roundabouts. Yeah. Yep.
Right. Anything else? Okay. Okay, good.
Thank you gentlemen for coming. Thank, thank you.
Appreciate that. Thank you. Okay, now we've got, uh, max
Marshall, uh, it's got a five minute individual,
one max in person.
Thank you, sir. Right.
Thank you. Okay.
Um, thank you chair. Thank you Members of the panel.
I want to address the idea
of Omni Omnibus bills
and talk about the challenge they are for lawmakers.
Putting them, putting legislation in a big box does not make
it necessarily work together better.
And omnibus bill may ignore the preexisting shortcomings
of individual pieces of legislation, uh,
and it doesn't, uh, often recognize the way
that the new legislation will work in relation to older, um,
Older law, um, legislation.
What I've noticed about big bills is they're often an
attempt to roll into one or raft of different legislations
and try to produce consistency across the areas they cover.
An omnibus, um, bill might, might,
may seem like it is just improving what it is already doing,
but the intractable policy problems
or big lumps fall inside untouched.
The omnibus solution means you hide the
legislation to give impression.
Um, the appearance
of efficacy, I say no to this.
It is no substitute for substantive changes in efficacy,
which only happens when making measurable dis differences in
terms of output and outcome distinction.
The only important one, um, is that of outcome.
I want an all in one approach by government
not just happening when it is contingent, such
as the collecting of child support payments, uh,
which involving the co cooperation between two
or more agencies, two different agencies can see the
same situation though through different lenses.
Instead, I want to see legislation applied more evenly in
alignment with other pieces of legislation, not
with double-headed management,
but, uh, singularity in its approach to
how it is applied to the individual.
The 2007 merger of 10 different agencies
into one building in Linwood, Christchurch was done not
for the convenience of the client,
but for the collaboration of these different agencies.
We, we see time
and time again where solution, the solution's only meant
for the benefit of the state, not the individual.
I want to address the circumstances
where a beneficiary has a student loan,
where the repayments could incur a hardship
since the inception
of the scheme borrowers have died without paying back the
balance for, for someone living on superannuation
with low or no savings.
I'm concerned about the hardship
that a repayment scheme will have.
MSD does not take into account the loss of income
for an individual in this circumstance,
but it manages the student loans scheme as well seen here
as an example of how, uh, go government,
even within one ministry works in silo.
There is a inflexible approach in terms to
how policy is applied.
I want an order one approach by government in terms
of looking at all its legislation and their outcomes
and then, um, uh, a mechanism
to remedy unintended consequences.
Very good. Any comments or questions? No. Okay.
Thank you for your comments. Thank you so much, max.
Thank you. And for getting us back on time. Thank you.
Right. Well that leads us to the, uh,
last presentation today, tax Justice ro.
We've got Glen Barclay, we've got Kate Stone,
and we've got, uh, bill Rosenberg welcome.
Uh, Tina K called Glen Barklay Ho.
I'm the Chair of Acts Justice Tiara.
This is Kate Stone, who's, uh, our campaign manager
and Bill Rosenberg, who's chair
of our policy advisory committee.
Um, just a couple of op opening remarks from me, which is
that, um, one of our key principles as an organization is
around tax transparency.
And we, our submission addresses, uh, has two kind of, um,
matching themes around transparency and privacy.
Um, there's often a tension between the two, uh,
and a balance to be struck.
Um, we do think that our, um, our submission addresses those
and has some solutions
that we'd like the committee to consider.
So if that, I'll hand over to Bill to talk through, um,
the priority, some of the priority issues in the submission.
Uh, thanks Glenn and thanks Committee.
Um, so the first one I'll address is the, um, the repeal
of Section 17 gb.
This provision is essential to enable better understanding
of the function of our tax system and practice.
It allowed the high Wealth individuals project
to proceed demonstrating the inequities of the tax system
where high wealth individuals are taxed at half the rate
of middle New Zealanders.
There are a number of options in the
regulatory impact statement that are, um, are possible.
Um, option one is the status quo,
and we support this option along with
land revenue implementing its draft operational statement on
section 17 gb, which are consulted on in 2021
and which addresses the privacy issues failing
that option one C should be accepted.
This restricts use of information to policy purposes
and is the official's preference
however much would depend on what the definition
of policy tax policy development is,
must allow research such
as the high wealth individuals project to proceed.
So we strongly recommend that section 17 GB not be repealed
and that option one a be implemented as we describe.
If option one A is not accepted, then option one C is
that officials will recommend should be accepted.
I, I'll now talk about two other issues that affect as then,
uh, introduced, uh, both confidentiality and transparency.
The, there is a pro proposal for information sharing by way
of ministerial agreement.
This proposal we consider breaks down further the principle
that tax information is confidential in order to encourage
reporting, even if the activity that gave rise
to the income was possibly unlawful,
non declaration could occur.
Not only when an activity is clearly illegal,
but also when the person is not sure
of their legal position.
It greatly extends the list of agencies
with which sharing can take place
and put such decisions in the hands
of the minister of revenue.
Even if strict principles for sharing are adhered to,
the impression could be created
amongst the public at a time when trust in government is
decreasing, that their tax information can go anywhere in
the government apparatus according to officials,
which is recorded in the regulatory impact statement.
There was no consultation on this proposal
before was brought to Parliament other than
with the privacy commissioner who opposes it.
It is not evidence-based and it has unpredictable outcomes.
There are existing sharing agreement arrangements
that can be used and have been used.
So we recommend that the proposal
for information share information sharing by way
of ministerial agreement not proceed that is rushed
and poorly considered legislation,
which could have significant negative consequences.
It should also add that it contrasts with the reasons given
for, uh, repealing section 17 gb, which tend
to circulate around privacy.
So on the one hand, uh, we are, um,
supposedly showing concern for privacy,
which can be protected against in 17 gb
and another hand opening it up very widely.
And then finally, uh,
what I'm gonna say is about the provisions.
Uh, the legislative provisions for trust disclosures.
This proposal would repeal specific legislative provisions
for trust disclosures and the Tax administration Act.
New Zealand and Australia appeared to be outliers
for their large use of trusts when compared with,
when comparing trust tax return filings
with other jurisdictions.
We used to make there was at least one trust
for every 12 people in New Zealand.
And then revenue calculator that as of 31st of March, 2023,
total assets reported by all trust in the states
total almost half a trillion, over half a trillion dollars,
$528 billion.
And that's likely to be a under underestimate
trust loom large and tax avoidance and minimization
and can be a barrier barrier to the effectiveness
of future tax changes is
therefore essential that we have more
information about them.
Given that until these provisions were enacted,
there was virtually no regular public information available.
Removing the requirement leaves the decision on whether the
trust disclosures will still be required
and whether it is an, is as extensive
as at present in the hands of the leaves
that decision in the hands of the commissioner, commissioner
who may well decide not
to continue the requirement in the face of other priorities
and other and financial pressures.
So we, we recommend that the legislative provisions
for trust disclosures not be repealed
and the status quo remains.
Thank you.
So just briefly, um, with respect
to the proposed tax treatment of so-called digital nomads,
we are concerned about the risk of exploitation
of foreign workers, um, through this provision.
And, um, I guess clearly the intention behind those changes
to the Immigration Act to increase the number
of digital nomads in New Zealand
and that would increase the risk of exploitation.
So in our submission, we recommend
that further safeguards are adopted and,
and we take a precautionary approach to to that situation.
The two main, um,
safeguards we recommend are requiring employers, uh, um,
those people that have been employed to provide, uh,
documentation to authorities
and also for IRD to, um, be required to maintain records
and to make statistics around that public.
Um, so that, um,
we can keep an eye on whether such exploitation is happening
in relation to, um, the exemption
of income from residential supply
of excess electricity from tax, um, we agree with officials
that there should be a cap on the amount
of income that is tax exempt.
Um, and in part this is
because it doesn't seem equitable that, um, other forms
of commercial supply that electricity are taxed.
Um, and that there is, um,
no public interest in giving people
who are com essentially running a commercial business, um,
might have multiple rental properties and, uh,
and generating income from that.
Also having another tax exempt source of income, um,
through the generation of electricity supply.
And then just finally, um, in relation to the fifth regime,
um, we suggest that the issues with
that regime could simply be addressed, um,
by adopting a broad-based tax on income from capital gains.
So that's all that we wanted to address you on today and,
and open for questions.
Very good questions. Yeah. Um, thank you.
Nice to see you all. Um, um,
I pick up the point about the electricity,
once we'll explore that with officials, um, with respect
to the disclosure of information, the ministerial rule and,
and the tension between that one and the other two.
Hold, you know, tightening up the rules
around privacy in one respect
and loosening them in the other.
It seems we've picked up that tension as well.
Um, it's a shame that Barb isn't here.
She had to be somewhere else, but she just recalls when, um,
the power to collect information was first, um,
merchant has now being expanded to, to ministerial, um,
that Winston Peters was really angry about it.
Have you, um, perhaps had any discussions
with New Zealand first and with Winston Peters about it?
Because that's the history of this particular, um,
have you thought about it, David?
Or y
Yes and no.
It hasn't Come up recently,
So I'm just Well, it's coming up now.
Yes. Yeah, yeah. No, we haven't,
but we, we should be open
to discussion if you're interested.
Absolutely. Yeah, that would be really good.
I think you're worth following up with David on that one.
Thank you. Yeah. Okay. Todd Stevenson,
Just on your, thanks for your submission coming in
just on the digital nomads.
Do you think you, do you think you might be
exaggerating the risk?
Because what you're basically seem to be implying is
that a company would send people to New Zealand to work
for up to 275 days an 18 month period,
not pay them well, but then they'd have to leave.
Right?
I mean, I'm just not sure how it would occur.
That's what I suppose I'm asking
because it doesn't, doesn't seem to make,
We've clearly had recent high profile instances
of migrant worker exploitation. Right.
But not digital. They weren't digital nomads.
No, I mean, I think our impression is
that there isn't any data on this
because it's not collected.
Um, but obviously with the increase in the number of people
who might be coming in through this regime,
there's an increased risk.
I think the other potential is
that you have someone who's New Zealand based establishes a
a company overseas and brings in workers that they're able
to pay a lot less, um,
because they're not subject to the same tax regime that
Wouldn't be applicable.
Yeah. So, okay. No, that's fine.
I just want to understand because I think,
and look, we don't, no one wants migrant exploitation,
but yeah, I just think you consumer might be
able, I'm just trying to understand what
You, I mean, I'll just add to what Kate said
that we we're not opposed to this in principle.
Yeah. Um, but we do think that look ha having seen
what has happened in many, uh, just should be monitored
immigration with many immigration rules,
that if there are any gaps in them, then
that does lead Yeah.
Frequently to, to exploitation.
I think we, and we just think this should
be more controls around,
I think just, I just try separation
immigration and taxation.
Thank you. Okay, well thanks, uh,
tax justice for coming in today.
That ends the, uh, public hearings
for today on the taxation bill.
So thank you to all submitters, uh, members.
Eight o'clock tomorrow morning,
we've got the financial stability report.
The RBN said next door room one.